---
title: 'Why did I go for a PhD? (P2)'
date: 2022-12-20
excerpt: ''
permalink: /posts/2022/phd2
tags:
  - thoughts
  - personal
  - anecdote
  - phd
---

This is the _second_ in a series of post in which I reflect on some milestones of my own life.  

"**Why doing this**", one may ask.
* For _myself_, because I like to look back at my own life and scrutinize my previous decisions.
* For _others_, because someone else may draw some inspiration from the stories I will narrate.  

### Disclaimer
At the moment of writing, I have no idea of how to structure all such "stories" -- so, I must warn the reader that whatever they will read may be subject to change, and may even be incomprehensible if one is not familiar with my persona.

___

# Introduction

After having lived for 31 years, 3 months and 9 days, it is difficult to determine _which decision **I made**_ had the greatest impact on **my** life. Yet, I find that going for a PhD was among the most significant ones. In what follows, I will attempt to summarize, contextualize and justify the reasons that made me opt for this path. <span class="footnote"><a href="#" style="color:firebrick">[a]</a><span class="footnote_content"> SPOILER: after reading many blogs of other renowned scientists and researchers, I can safely state that my reasons are much different from anyone else's---and by a huge margin.</span></span>

To this purpose, however, I must first provide some background on myself. Starting from when I began my BSc. <span class="footnote"><a href="#" style="color:firebrick">[b]</a><span class="footnote_content"> WARNING: the following content can be rather sensitive.)</span></span>


## (De)Motivated

My whole being was extremely confused at the end of December 2013. 

On the one hand, I was somewhat disappointed at my result: I was unable to obtain the "perfect" graduation mark that I had been longing for since I began my BSc. degree---and I was very much intended to rectify this "shortcoming" during my MSc.
On the other hand, the recent events (i.e., the causes that led to me not reaching my objective despite putting extensive efforts, intermingled with the death of my cat) deprived me of the motivation to focus on my studies. 

I must stress that I was oblivious of such lack of motivation: if one were to approach me in December 2013 (or anytime during 2014), and asked me which was my objective, I would have answered "Getting my MSc. _cum laude_." Yet, there was nothing that I did for the following 15 (fifteen!) months that could be used to support such an answer. Indeed, from December 2013 until February 2015, my entire life was (subconsciously) devoted on a single activity: video-gaming.

Now, I will dedicate a different post on the subject of videogames. What I will describe below is just the most essential elements for understanding the purpose of this article, i.e., my internal development during my MSc. degree, stemming with the decision to go for a Ph.D. 

## A Healthy Drug

Let me start from the end: from December 2013 (i.e., when I officially started my MSc.) until February 2015, I had only 15 CFU registered in my gradebook (out of 120), corresponding to just two exams. I did attempt others, but either I did not "complete" them (i.e., I only did parts of them, some of which with unsatisfactory results) or I straight out failed them. Moreover, I barely attended any lesson at all. Put simply, during this timeframe, my days could be summarized as: wake up at 2PM, play Guild Wars 2 until 7AM, go to bed, rinse & repeat.

**Why Guild Wars 2?** Put simply, it was a (relatively) new game that I happened to like (in 2013) and which provided the right mixture of "competitive" and "casual" gameplay. The last was crucial for my situation, as it fueled the so-called "instant gratification" that is typical of many addictive activities. Let me briefly explain. Games that are highly competitive have a playerbase who give their all to win; hence, either you are also willing to push yourself to the limit, or you will hardly win any match---which is the entire goal of the game. Conversely, games that lack any form of "Player versus Player" tend to become stale after a while---either because you simply finish the game (hence, why keep on playing?) or because the only opponent is an AI (which, once you learn how to beat, you will feel very little pleasure in doing so). Guild Wars 2 falls exactly in the middle of these two categories: it has a PvP component, but most of its players do not have a true competitive mindset. Hence, it takes little effort to become "above average", thereby leading to a player "easily" beating a lot of other players---and doing this _feels good_. 


**Perfectionism.** My story is simple: from being a complete casual, I decided -- on a whim -- to start putting more effort into this game. As a consequence, I started "to win" and -- since that felt good -- I kept on doing this over and over, thereby increasing my skill in the process. At the beginning, I was just lurking some forums and public boards; then, I started to develop my own playstyle, which I kept on refining in any way I could. Whatever I was doing during a given day, I was thinking about "how to get better", or "how to beat a certain opponent" or even "what I would do in a given situation". I began recording the videos of my own gameplay and analyzed them; I wrote down math formulas and ran simulations; I began experimenting with different playstyles---sometimes against other player with the same mindset and purpose as mine. 

## What about my studies?

We only live 24 hours per day, and we cannot pursue many different goals (with the same degree of success) at the same time. Hence, it is only logical that my dramatic improvement as a Guild Wars 2 player was accompanied by a complete lack of progress towards my "perfect" MSc. graduation goal. However, I was not aware of this until February 2015. 

**An imaginary slap.**
I still remember it today. It was a Monday, in late-February 2015. On the following day, I was supposed to have the "second" part <span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[a]</a><span class="footnote_content">The grade was an average of the first and second part, which could be increased by up to +3 with an oral examination. I received a 27/30 in the first part---in June 2014!.</span></span> of an exam. It was 7AM, and my mother (who knew about the exam) came into my room and said something along the lines of "are you sure you're going to pass the exam?" to which I instinctively replied "Yes, of course!". She did not say anything more, but her question resonated in my head. The following day, I did the exam; and failed it.<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[b]</a><span class="footnote_content">Such failure led to the (arguably nice) score I got on June 2014 to disappear: I had to redo it from scratch.</span></span> I decided that I had to change something.  

**Epiphany (and excuses).**
In just a few days, everything became clear to me. What I had been doing for the past 15 months was an activity with no relevance to my _true_ goal, and which began due to _excuses_ which I used to justify my lack of devotion to such a goal. Let me summarize such excuses:
* Since I started my MSc. in (late) December 2013, I had already missed all lectures held between September and December 2013. Hence, it "made sense" that I did not focus on such exams in the Jan./Feb. 2014 session.
* Since I did not do any exam in the Jan./Feb. 2014 session, it was likely that the subjects taught in the following semester would be hard to grasp for me. Hence, it "made sense" that I did not attend the lectures held during Mar.--Jun 2014.
* Essentially, in June 2014 I had attended no lesson and no exam registered in my gradebook. I had to do "something", so it made sense to focus on the easiest exams---which I did with some success: I passed one with 27/30, and the first part of another (described above) also with 27/30.<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[c]</a><span class="footnote_content">In retrospect, such grades probably did more harm than good since they delayed me realizing the issue.</span></span>
* During Sept.--Dec. 2014, I was at my peak in Guild Wars 2 and my (arguably) decent grades got in the summer exams made me believe that "ultimately I do not really need to attend lectures!"; as a matter of fact, all courses had plenty of slides, so I could just study on them!  
* In January 2015 I did one exam, which I passed with a 28/30. The reason why I did not get a 30 was because I was asked a question whose answer was not found in the slides. I blamed it to the TA, and not to my lack of diligence as a student.
* In February 2015, when I was (attempting to) exercise for the exam that I ultimately failed, I even went to the extent of thinking that "I can even accept an 18 here, after all." Surely, such a score would not irremediably compromise my chances of getting a "perfect" graduation score, but if I began to put the bar so low, then what was the point in aiming for the top?

The "slap" I received from my mother made me realize of absurd my life was turning out to be.<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[d]</a><span class="footnote_content">In February 2015, I had over 5k hours of gameplay in Guild Wars 2. Given that I started playing that game in June 2013, you can do the math.</span></span> 


## Change

Let me, once again, start from the end. In March 2015, I had 2 exams registered, for a total of 15credits (out of 120) and an average grade of 27.3. I graduated in July 2016 (meaning that in just 14 months I obtained 105credits), with an average grade of ~29, which allowed me to receive the "perfect" graduation mark (i.e., "_cum laude_", the highest grade in Italy).
What I did was simple: I changed my priorities. The time I originally dedicated to Guild Wars 2, I now dedicated to my studies---and, in particular, to programming.

**Programming is fun.**
In the first part of this series of post, I acknowledged many times that my programming skills were far from exceptional at the end of my BSc. degree. While I cannot claim that now they are, I can safely state that my understanding of programming (and of computer science as a whole) dramatically improved in the second part of my MSc. degree, as I began to spend a substantial amount of time in solving programming exercises, sometimes developing original solutions in "unique" programming languages  <span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[d]</a><span class="footnote_content">I'm talking about you, NetLogo!</span></span>, while also paying much more attention to some theoretical aspects (such as data compression!) that are fascinating and I (naively) overlooked in the past. 

**Lectures are still a no-no.**
Perhaps surprisingly, my stance on lectures did not change. In other words, I did not attend a single lecture even during the "second" part of my MSc. degree. This is because of two reasons:
* First, because most of the concepts pertaining to computer science _can be found online_; hence, even if some parts are vague, I could simply perform a quick web-search to clear any of my doubts. 
* Second, because I spent so much time in programming (or exercising autonomously) that I truly did not need such lectures---at least from a learning perspective (and my exam grades confirmed this fact).

However, there is a crucial remark I must make: students should not attend universities solely for "passing exams"; at the same time, a lecturer should not be just one who "delivers some knowledge" (as I stated above, obtaining such knowledge *today* can be done without a univesity---especially in subjects related to computer science). On the contrary, a **lecturer should be a source of inspiration for the students**, and the lectures should be a means to convey such inspiration. In my case, I can simply state that it was my own curiosity that inspired me to study the subjects of my MSc., and hence I did feel I needed attending the lectures.<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[e]</a><span class="footnote_content">On a side note, I do invite other colleagues/academics to try nurturing such "inspirational" role of university lecturers: given the ease of access to computer science-related content, having "knowledge only" lectures will be harmful to the system of higher education.</span></span>   

(end of part 2)


### Lessons Learned (from my MSc., 6 years later)


However, it would be a significant mistake to conclude that (i) what I accomplished in Guild Wars 2 was useless; and (ii) that my "addiction" was self-developed. Indeed, me focusing on video-gaming was due to diverse _external_ factors that crucially influenced my own mental integrity; and I can safely state that most of the techniques I use _today_ stem from what I learned as a competitive gamer.









https://www.reddit.com/r/blackdesertonline/comments/540c8f/accuracy_evasion_bhegs_and_serendia_meal/

- https://www.reddit.com/r/blackdesertonline/comments/4nwv0j/question_does_ultimate_yuria_give_more_accuracy/

- https://www.reddit.com/r/blackdesertonline/comments/4nm9mw/i_killed_5000_ogre_and_got_10_rings_ama/

- https://www.reddit.com/r/blackdesertonline/comments/686e6p/evasion_scaling_test/

- https://bdomaths.wordpress.com/2016/07/16/your-new-liverto-a-daunting-experience/

- https://forums.jeuxonline.info/sujet/1328206-2/quel-variance-hormis-yuria-et-grunil

https://web.archive.org/web/20160524223952/http://forum.blackdesertonline.com/index.php?/topic/52405-accuracy-explained-updated-17052016-read-the-first-post-serendia-special-is-bugged/&page=10