---
title: 'Why did I go for a PhD? (P3)'
date: 2023-12-31
excerpt: 'The last entry of this series of posts'
permalink: /posts/2023/phd3
tags:
  - thoughts
  - personal
  - anecdote
  - phd
---

This is the _third_ of a series of post in which I reflect on some milestones of my own life.

### Disclaimer
At the moment of writing, I have no idea of how to structure all such "stories." Hence, I warn the reader that whatever is written here may be subject to change, and may even be incomprehensible if one is not familiar with my persona.


___

# Foreword

After having lived for 32 years, 4 months and 24 days, it is difficult to determine _which decision **I made**_ had the greatest impact on **my** life. Yet, I find that going for a PhD was among the most significant ones. In what follows, I will attempt to summarize, contextualize and justify the reasons that made me opt for this path. <span class="footnote"><a href="#" style="color:firebrick">[a]</a><span class="footnote_content"> SPOILER: after reading many blogs of other renowned scientists and researchers, I can safely state that my reasons are much different from anyone else's---and by a huge margin.</span></span>

In two previous posts I elucidated the major events that transpired during my [BSc]({{ base_path }}/posts/2023/phd1) (from 2010 to 2013) and most of my [MSc]({{ base_path }}/posts/2023/phd2) (from 2013 to 2016). Here, I will bring an end to this "story" and focus the attention on the most relevant developments of 2016. Differently from the previous posts, however, I will present my arguments in a sparse order.

## My MSc. thesis

I have mixed feelings on my MSc. thesis. Yet, it deeply influenced my decision to go for a PhD. 

**Evolution.** 
It all started in the usual way: after I obtained enough credits, I had a meeting with my chosen advisor (Prof. Colajanni) and told him that I was ready to begin working on my thesis. I told him about "things that I liked", and I mentioned _cybersecurity_, _maths_, _data analysis_. He then proposed me to do something at the intersection of research and practice: I was to spend some time in a SOC (Security Operation Centre) of a major Italian bank, and try to "develop something" that supports the security operators that work therein. In retrospect, it sounds very vague---but I liked it at the time, apparently.<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[a]</a><span class="footnote_content">Albeit, I probably had no idea whatsoever of "what" to do for my MSc. thesis, so I'd say that anything that my advisor would have proposed would have been "OK".</span></span> What I did not know, however, was what such a thesis concealed: being "at the intersection" of research and practice, the thesis had _the difficulties_ of research (i.e., lack of certainties) and practice (i.e., bureaucracy). I will not bore you with the details, but I will just mention some relevant dates: I "accepted" such a thesis in December 2015; I was to graduate in July 2016 (deadline for submission: July 7th); my first "visit" to the SOC took place<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[b]</a><span class="footnote_content">I was stuck in a "limbo" of communications between my advisor, his contacts at the bank, and the HR office of the bank.</span></span> on May 22nd; and the last day I could go to the SOC was June 30th. Nobody was at fault,<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[c]</a><span class="footnote_content">One must acknowledge that SOC of _banks_ are extremely sensitive environments, so it is understandable that the process was far from simple.</span></span> but this led to a waste of time which I could have spent on "practical" developments. In contrast, the only thing I could do (and did) during most of such time was to "familiarize myself with the literature"<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[d]</a><span class="footnote_content">I even found a mistake in a paper co-authored by my advisor that was currently undergoing peer-review!</span></span>, which was not very enticing---especially from the viewpoint of someone who _had not read a single research paper_. Nevertheless, to further add to this Odyssey, on June 28th I received an email from my thesis supervisor, saying "Hey, if you're interested in the PhD, be aware that the deadline for submitting your application is June 30th". Suffice it to say, I did not sleep much during that month---but I did achieve something.<span class="footnote"><a style="color:firebrick">[e]</a><span class="footnote_content">For my thesis, I used [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org/){:target="_blank"}. At that time (mid-2016) the documentation of this framework was just terrible, and there were no tutorials nor StackOverflow (and let alone ChatGPT) that could help...</span></span>


**Submission.**


**Regrets.**

## What is a PhD?

TBD

## My Convictions (and)

* Freedom
* Finances
* Family / Health
* Sleep
* My advisor
* Alternatives




## It's not the first time...

* Gaming
* Black Desert
* Guild Wars 2


### In retrospect

Was it the right choice?








