---
title: 'Why did I go for a PhD? (P3)'
date: 2023-12-17
excerpt: 'The last entry of this series of posts'
permalink: /posts/2023/phd3
tags:
  - thoughts
  - personal
  - anecdote
  - phd
---

This is the _third_ in a series of post in which I reflect on some milestones of my own life.  

### Disclaimer
At the moment of writing, I have no idea of how to structure all such "stories" -- so, I must warn the reader that whatever is written here may be subject to change, and may even be incomprehensible if one is not familiar with my persona.

___

# Foreword

After having lived for 31 years, 3 months and 9 days, it is difficult to determine _which decision **I made**_ had the greatest impact on **my** life. Yet, I find that going for a PhD was among the most significant ones. In what follows, I will attempt to summarize, contextualize and justify the reasons that made me opt for this path. <span class="footnote"><a href="#" style="color:firebrick">[a]</a><span class="footnote_content"> SPOILER: after reading many blogs of other renowned scientists and researchers, I can safely state that my reasons are much different from anyone else's---and by a huge margin.</span></span>

To this purpose, however, I must first provide some background on myself. In [a previous post], I elucidated the major events that transpired during my [BSc]({{ base_path }}/posts/2023/phd1) and most of my [MSc]({{ base_path }}/posts/2023/phd2). Here... 

## My MSc. thesis

* Evolution
* Submission
* Regrets

## What is a PhD?

TBD

## My Convictions (and)

* Freedom
* Finances
* Family / Health
* Sleep
* My advisor
* Alternatives




## It's not the first time...

* Gaming
* Black Desert
* Guild Wars 2


### In retrospect

Was it the right choice?








